# pyYadc
pyYadc stands for "Python - Yet Another Documentation Compiler".

This is an automated generator of HTML documentation.  It  provides  automatic 
formatting  of  documentation for Python packages.  Any available docstring is 
extracted and put as is near the documented items, i.e.:
  - modules (as contained in the package);
  - classes (as defined in each module);
  - functions (as defined in each module and in each class).

User is advised that when generating  documentation  for  Python 2  syntax,  a 
Python 2.x interpreter has  to be used while when generating documentation for 
Python 3 syntax, a Python 3.x interpreter should be used.


## Installation
From this repository, download directory `scr/` onto your machine. It might be suitable to rename it 'pyYadc' then on your local machine. Every needed stuff is contained in this `src/` directory. Have a look at section __Usage__ below to see how to play with pyYadc.

You may also download the content of two other directories:
- `doc/` contains the HTML documentation of this software
- `eclipse-photon-metadata/` contains an empty directory and two `.project...` files that you can download. They will be useful for the ones who use Eclipse framework in its version Photon (June 2018). Just put them as is in your local 'pyYadc' directory. You will then be able to easily import PyYadc as a project in Eclipse Photon.

### Important Notice
The GitHub pages for pyYadc, available at https://schmouk.github.io/pyYadc/, propose two buttons 'zip' and 'tar' to download compressed versions of the whole repository. Do not hesitate to go there for your downloadings of pyYadc.


## Usage:
The working directory is the directory that contains the Python package to be 
documented. Command is then:

    $ python <path_to_your_local_pyYadc_dir>/pyYadc.py <package_name>

No options are available with current version 1.0.

Please notice that the HTML documentation of PyYadc has been generated by pyYadc itself.

Copyright (c) 2016-2021 Philippe Schmouker, pyYadc project, https://github.com/schmouk/PyYadc
(and https://schmouk.github.io/pyYadc/)
